One way to control app startup is through Task Manager,
Task Manager is a really useful tool.
You can use the Ctrl+Shift+Esc key combination; that's
been around for a long time in Windows.
You can right-click the taskbar and choose Open Task Manager.
From a command prompt you can type taskmgr.
exe.
This is where you go to look at running programs,
but you see all those tabs across the top?
You can do so much more.
Microsoft keeps adding more and more functionality to Task Manager,
and in Windows 10 we have a Startup tab that lists not
only your auto-start applications, but also their impact on performance.
You want to keep auto-start programs to only ones you need and use
because they can and will sap your system performance.
They're running all the time in the background,
and if it's a vulnerable application or a questionable
application in terms of reputation you could have an
expanded attack surface on your system, even though that's not what you want.
Now I think that any PC technician needs to have the Sys
Internal Tools in his or her tool belt.
This is a screenshot of AutoRuns.
If you're not familiar with it get familiar with it.
I'm going to do a brief demo on it momentarily.
This leaves nothing to the imagination.
If there's a process or an application or a service that's set
to auto-start you're going to see it here.
You can disable these entries, you can delete the entries,
you can investigate them.
This is critical because a malware infected system almost always is
going to put hooks in your systems auto-start.
Quick trivia question based on our previous modules,
where is app auto-start information stored fundamentally on a Windows system?
What do you think?
The answer is the registry, remember,
and this tool will actually point to where in the registry that data is stored.
as a matter of fact, it's very small on the screen,
but the very first AutoRun entry is an HK local machine system path.
Now I want to warn you, though, don't be too aggressive in deleting auto-starts.
Have an idea of why it's there.
For instance, it might be too small on your screen to see,
but the very first entry I have on this screenshot is cmd.
exe, and you might think, whoa,
what's a command prompt running on my system at auto-start.
I'm going to delete that.
Be careful.
I generated this screenshot while I was troubleshooting a system,
and if you look, again, it might be too small,
but that HK local machine system registry path goes
out to SafeBoot\AlternateShell, so I'm actually booting in a diagnostic mode.
I don't want to mess up that command shell.
That's internal to Windows.
I'm going to use my normal operating system controls
when I'm finished troubleshooting,
and the next time I do a normal startup that entry is going to disappear from the list automatically.